docs/ADR/ADR-0001-workspace-topology.md, before:

---
id: ADR-0001
title: "Canonical Topology — Dual-Clone via Git Remote (Short)"
date: 2025-08-21
status: Accepted
author:
  - Promachos Governance
related: ["ADR-0003", "ADR-0004", "ADR-0008", "ADR-0009"]
last_updated: 2025-08-22
---

# ADR-0001: Canonical Topology — Dual-Clone via Git Remote (Short)

## Table of Contents
1. Decision (2025-08-21)
2. Backup Storage Decision (2025-08-22)
3. Addendum v3: Remote HEAD = Add-on Subtree (2025-08-22)
4. Addendum: Runtime Artifacts & Clean Deploy (2025-08-22)
5. Addendum v2: Canonical Paths & Directory Rules (2025-08-22)


**Decision (2025-08-21):**
- Workspace clone at `HA-BB8/addon/` (no symlinks, no submodules)
- Runtime clone at `/addons/local/beep_boop_bb8`
- Deploy = push (workspace) → fetch+hard-reset (runtime), then restart add-on in HA
- Single report sink via `REPORT_ROOT` exported by wrappers
- Operational tools live under `HA-BB8/ops/` (not inside `addon/`)

**Status:** Approved. Supersedes symlink proposals.

**Notes:** Acceptance tokens: `WS_READY …`, `DEPLOY_OK …`, `VERIFY_OK …`, `STRUCTURE_OK`.

```yaml
TOKEN_BLOCK:
  accepted:
    - WS_READY
    - DEPLOY_OK
    - VERIFY_OK
    - STRUCTURE_OK
    - SUBTREE_PUBLISH_OK
    - CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK
    - RUNTIME_TOPOLOGY_OK
  drift:
    - DRIFT: structure_invalid
    - DRIFT: deploy_failed
    - DRIFT: runtime_topology_invalid
```

**Backup Storage Decision (2025-08-22):**
- All workspace backups must be stored as folder tarballs inside the `_backups` directory.
- Good example: `_backups/_backups_20250821_034242.tar.gz` (single tarball file)
- Bad example: `_backups_20250821_071118Z` (loose backup folder, not tarballed)

**Addendum v3 (2025-08-22): Remote HEAD = Add-on Subtree**
- The GitHub repository `e-app-404/ha-bb8-addon`’s `main` branch contains **only** the add-on (the contents of `HA-BB8/addon`) at the repository root.
- Publishing from the workspace uses a subtree publish (archive/filter): export `HA-BB8/addon/` and force-push to `main`.
- Runtime clone `/addons/local/beep_boop_bb8` tracks `origin/main` and is hard-reset on deploy.
- **Forbidden at runtime (and in the add-on repo root):** `docs/`, `ops/`, `reports/`, `scripts/`, `.githooks/`, `.github/`, `_backups/`, and any nested `addon/`.
- **Acceptance Tokens:** `SUBTREE_PUBLISH_OK`, `CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK`, `DEPLOY_OK`, `VERIFY_OK`, `RUNTIME_TOPOLOGY_OK`.
- **Operational Note:** Workspace governance (CI/guards for `ops/`, `reports/`, etc.) applies to the workspace, not the add-on repo. The add-on repo enforces **add-on–only** structure.

**Addendum v4 (2025-08-22): Runtime Artifacts & Clean Deploy**
- Runtime artifacts (logs, caches, reports) MUST live under the container’s `/data` (host: `/data/addons/data/<slug>`).
- The repo’s `addon/reports/` (and `addon/docs/reports/`) are template-only; generated content is ignored via `.gitignore`.
- The deploy step includes `git clean -fdx` on the runtime clone prior to reset to guarantee a clean runtime.
- Acceptance tokens now include `CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK` preceding `DEPLOY_OK`.


**Addendum v2 (2025-08-22): Canonical Paths & Directory Rules**
Effective immediately:

- Workspace must-have (root): `ops/`, `reports/`, `scripts/`, `docs/`, `.githooks/`, `.github/`, `_backups/`
- Workspace must-not (root): `tests/`, `tools/`, `_backup/` (old name), any `*_backup_*` loose folders
- Add-on must-have: `addon/bb8_core/`, `addon/tools/`, `addon/tests/`, `addon/services.d/`, `addon/app/`, `addon/.devcontainer/`, and core files: `addon/config.yaml`, `addon/Dockerfile`, `addon/Makefile`, `addon/README.md`, `addon/VERSION`, `addon/apparmor.txt`
- Add-on must-not: `addon/scripts/`, `addon/reports/`, `addon/docs/`, `addon/_backup*/`, env caches (`.venv`, `.pytest_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.mypy_cache`)
- Runtime artifacts remain in container: `/data/...` (host: `/data/addons/data/<slug>/...`)

Commit message:

BB8 B5: add steady-state governance receipt, mirror ssh_20251028T172513Z evidence, and refresh BB8-FUNC INDEX (plus governance instructions/runtime state)

docs/ADR/ADR-0001-workspace-topology.md, after:

---
id: ADR-0001
title: "Canonical Topology — Dual-Clone via Git Remote (Short)"
date: 2025-08-21
status: Accepted
decision: Adopt a dual-clone topology with a workspace clone at HA-BB8/addon and a runtime clone at /addons/local/beep_boop_bb8, deploying via push and hard-reset, enforcing strict directory rules and clean runtime state for reliable add-on operations.
author:
  - Promachos Governance
related: ["ADR-0003", "ADR-0004", "ADR-0008", "ADR-0009"]
last_updated: 2025-08-22
---

# ADR-0001: Canonical Topology — Dual-Clone via Git Remote (Short)

## Table of Contents

1. Decision (2025-08-21)
2. Backup Storage Decision (2025-08-22)
3. Addendum v3: Remote HEAD = Add-on Subtree (2025-08-22)
4. Addendum: Runtime Artifacts & Clean Deploy (2025-08-22)
5. Addendum v2: Canonical Paths & Directory Rules (2025-08-22)

**Decision (2025-08-21):**

- Workspace clone at `HA-BB8/addon/` (no symlinks, no submodules)
- Runtime clone at `/addons/local/beep_boop_bb8`
- Deploy = push (workspace) → fetch+hard-reset (runtime), then restart add-on in HA
- Single report sink via `REPORT_ROOT` exported by wrappers
- Operational tools live under `HA-BB8/ops/` (not inside `addon/`)

**Status:** Approved. Supersedes symlink proposals.

**Notes:** Acceptance tokens: `WS_READY …`, `DEPLOY_OK …`, `VERIFY_OK …`, `STRUCTURE_OK`.

```yaml
TOKEN_BLOCK:
  accepted:
    - WS_READY
    - DEPLOY_OK
    - VERIFY_OK
    - STRUCTURE_OK
    - SUBTREE_PUBLISH_OK
    - CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK
    - RUNTIME_TOPOLOGY_OK
  drift:
    - DRIFT: structure_invalid
    - DRIFT: deploy_failed
    - DRIFT: runtime_topology_invalid
```

**Backup Storage Decision (2025-08-22):**

- All workspace backups must be stored as folder tarballs inside the `_backups` directory.
- Good example: `_backups/_backups_20250821_034242.tar.gz` (single tarball file)
- Bad example: `_backups_20250821_071118Z` (loose backup folder, not tarballed)

**Addendum v3 (2025-08-22): Remote HEAD = Add-on Subtree**

- The GitHub repository `e-app-404/ha-bb8-addon`’s `main` branch contains **only** the add-on (the contents of `HA-BB8/addon`) at the repository root.
- Publishing from the workspace uses a subtree publish (archive/filter): export `HA-BB8/addon/` and force-push to `main`.
- Runtime clone `/addons/local/beep_boop_bb8` tracks `origin/main` and is hard-reset on deploy.
- **Forbidden at runtime (and in the add-on repo root):** `docs/`, `ops/`, `reports/`, `scripts/`, `.githooks/`, `.github/`, `_backups/`, and any nested `addon/`.
- **Acceptance Tokens:** `SUBTREE_PUBLISH_OK`, `CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK`, `DEPLOY_OK`, `VERIFY_OK`, `RUNTIME_TOPOLOGY_OK`.
- **Operational Note:** Workspace governance (CI/guards for `ops/`, `reports/`, etc.) applies to the workspace, not the add-on repo. The add-on repo enforces **add-on–only** structure.

**Addendum v4 (2025-08-22): Runtime Artifacts & Clean Deploy**

- Runtime artifacts (logs, caches, reports) MUST live under the container’s `/data` (host: `/data/addons/data/<slug>`).
- The repo’s `addon/reports/` (and `addon/docs/reports/`) are template-only; generated content is ignored via `.gitignore`.
- The deploy step includes `git clean -fdx` on the runtime clone prior to reset to guarantee a clean runtime.
- Acceptance tokens now include `CLEAN_RUNTIME_OK` preceding `DEPLOY_OK`.

**Addendum v2 (2025-08-22): Canonical Paths & Directory Rules**
Effective immediately:

- Workspace must-have (root): `ops/`, `reports/`, `scripts/`, `docs/`, `.githooks/`, `.github/`, `_backups/`
- Workspace must-not (root): `tests/`, `tools/`, `_backup/` (old name), any `*_backup_*` loose folders
- Add-on must-have: `addon/bb8_core/`, `addon/tools/`, `addon/tests/`, `addon/services.d/`, `addon/app/`, `addon/.devcontainer/`, and core files: `addon/config.yaml`, `addon/Dockerfile`, `addon/Makefile`, `addon/README.md`, `addon/VERSION`, `addon/apparmor.txt`
- Add-on must-not: `addon/scripts/`, `addon/reports/`, `addon/docs/`, `addon/_backup*/`, env caches (`.venv`, `.pytest_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.mypy_cache`)
- Runtime artifacts remain in container: `/data/...` (host: `/data/addons/data/<slug>/...`)
